---
title: Type Classes from the Ground Up - Introduction
tags: scala
---
_Type Classes from the Ground Up_ is a series of post in which I'll try to explain type classes, what's so great about
them, and how to go about writing your own in a way that will make them easy to use by others.

<!--more-->

# Introduction
I intend to avoid getting into too much theoretical details - such as how type classes are a hybrid sort of polymorphism
that mix ad-hoc and parametric polymorphism, for example - not because they're not interesting, but because it's been
written about in depth by people much more qualified than I am to discuss these aspects.

This whole series is going to be grounded in an actual, concrete and relatable use-case. There's nothing wrong with
using `Functor` and other category theory abstractions as examples, but I feel it adds a layer of complexity for people
who have not encountered either concept before.

Our use-case, then, is going to be parsing CSV file. This is something I'm starting to have some level of familiarity
with, since that's mostly what [Tabulate](https://nrinaudo.github.io/tabulate), one of my public projects, is about.
It's also a task that lends itself very well to using type classes.


# Caveat Emptor

This is very much a work in progress. Some sections are not complete, and I tend to have a very organic writing process:
it's entirely possible, even likely, that while writing these sections I'll get stuck somewhere and realize that my
examples don't flow as logically as I thought they did, and will need to rewrite at least some of what preceded.

This has been pushed before it was ready because:

* frankly, that's the only way it'll get published. Writing is not something that I do with ease, let alone in a
  language that I wasn't born to, and unless I push *something*, I'll get discouraged and publish *nothing*.
* I got in an online discussion where I needed to essentially write [Composition](/2015/11/23/tcgu-part-2.html) as a
  reply. Instead of going through the trouble, I decided to just publish what had already been written.


# Structure
In order to ensure that all the code used throughough the series compiles and runs as expected, every post passed
through [tut](https://github.com/tpolecat/tut). This is pretty great, but forces a certain structure: every post *must*
have a recap of what was done in the previous ones, complete with the relevant code. When reading the series in one go,
you can safely skip the _what we've done so far_ sections.


# Table of Contents

* [Introduction](/2015/11/21/tcgu-part-0.html): this post.
* [Motivation](/2015/11/21/tcgu-part-1.html): what problem do type classes solve?
* [Composition](/2015/11/23/tcgu-part-2.html): explains how simple type class instances compose implicitly to make more
  complex ones at no cost.
* [Derivation](/2015/11/26/tcgu-part-3.html): automatic derivation of type class instances through (*Work In Progress*).
  [shapeless](https://github.com/milessabin/shapeless)
* [Resolution](/2015/12/01/tcgu-part-4.html): explains how implicit instances are resolved and how to set up default
  instances in useful ways (*Work In Progress*).
* [Amelioration](/2015/12/13/tcgu-part-5.html): shows operations that are expected of modern type class
  implementations and how to get them for (mostly) free.
